---
title: "3D Model of Bowser's Mario Kart"
layout: single
author_profile: true
excerpt: "Final Year Research Project "
header:
  teaser: "images/logo-1.png"
---

---
bibliography:
- ref.bib
---

::: textblock*
5cm(175mm,73mm) [042]{.sans-serif}
:::

::: textblock*
132mm(65mm,90mm)

::: center
[*Effect of Cooling Rate from Homogenisation Temperature on AA6XXX
Alloys during High-temperature Compression Testing*]{.sans-serif}
:::
:::

::: textblock*
132mm(65mm,152mm)

::: mdframed
::: center
[Project Brief]{.sans-serif}
:::

[*The cooling rate from the homogenisation temperature of AA6XXX series
material prior to extrusion results in variations in the precipitation
of $Mg$ and $Si$ in $\beta$ and $\beta$' phases that form during the
cooling step. The precipitates present in the material upon extrusion
directly affect the deformation resistance of the material itself, and
thus, the pressure experienced during compression testing. The initial
study is to conduct microstructural analysis on the varying
microstructure that forms post-homogenisation as a result of the cooling
rates and consequently analyse data from a series of high-temperature
uniaxial compression tests on samples that have been exposed to varying
cooling rates from the homogenisation temperature.*]{.sans-serif}
:::
:::

::: textblock*
132mm(65mm,257mm)

::: mdframed
:::
:::

::: textblock*
72mm(125mm,273mm)

::: mdframed
:::
:::

# Acknowledgements {#acknowledgements .unnumbered}

I would like my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Dr Sarah George, for
her invaluable guidance, mentorship and unwavering support throughout
this report. I am also grateful to my family for their love,
understanding and encouragement during this challenging academic
journey. Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge the contributions of
my friends and colleagues who provided motivation, collaboration and
moral support. I am deeply appreciative of all the individuals who have
played a role in the completion of this report.

# Introduction

## Background

Over the past twenty years, there has been a notable increase in the use
of Aluminium alloys, namely within the aerospace and automotive
sectors [@Sheppard1999]. The AA6XXX series is widely recognised for its
considerable corrosion resistance, high strength-to-weight ratio,
favourable formability, and exceptional extrudability. These
characteristics are primarily attributed to the significant presence of
Magnesium and Silicon as alloying elements in this series [@Miller2000].

The conventional approach to processing aluminium profiles generally
includes the stages of billet casting, followed by homogenisation,
cooling, and hot extrusion. Homogenisation holds particular significance
as the microstructure of the billets, as initially cast, tends to be
heterogeneous [@Sheppard1999]. This step is instrumental in ensuring a
uniform distribution of alloying elements and improving extrudability
while giving a better surface finish [@Birol2004]. The cooling rate from
homogenisation temperature is equally important as it results in
variations in the precipitation of Mg and Si $\beta$ and $\beta$' phases
that form. These precipitates have an impact on the material's
deformation resistance, and subsequently, the pressure experienced
during compression testing.

## Aims and Objectives

This research project aims to investigate the correlation between the
rate at which AA6XXX series alloy cools from its homogenisation
temperature and the resulting resistance to deformation during
high-temperature uniaxial compression testing. Through an examination of
the varying precipitation microstructures that form as a result of
different cooling rates, the project seeks to explore the impact of
these microstructural changes on the required force needed to compress
these alloys.

To accomplish these aims, the following research objectives are to be
met:

-   Analyse microstructural images of samples exposed to different
    cooling rates.

-   Analyse data from a series of high-temperature uniaxial compression
    tests on samples that have been subjected to different cooling rates
    from the homogenisation temperature.

-   Investigate how the microstructure that forms is linked to the flow
    stress required to compress the alloys.

## Scope and Limitations

In this report, the image analysis has been limited to 10 representative
images for each sample. The image analysis will **not** provide a full
in-depth image analysis on each image but will rather analyse the images
for main microstructural features.

Additionally, the analysis will solely rely on existing gleeble data
collected from previous compression tests performed in earlier studies,
with no plans for additional compression testing in this study.

## Report RoadMap

This report starts by providing background information on the AA6XXX
alloys. The use and importance of these alloys were outlined. Following
this chapter, Chapter 2 introduces the broader context of aluminium
alloys, discussing the various alloying elements and their effects. It
delves into the processing of aluminium alloys, emphasizing how process
parameters impact the mechanical properties of the final extrudate.

Chapter 3 covers the experimental procedure employed for microstructural
/image analysis and the methodological approach employed for the data
analysis of the Gleeble test.

Chapter 4 presents the results of the processed data, which includes
flow stress vs strain plot for all samples as well as results from image
analysis, with a focus on particle size and distribution.

Chapter 5 discusses these results, identifying trends and evaluating the
reliability of the results presented. Potential disparities between
findings and existing literature are also explored.

The final two chapters close off the report with Chapter 6 highlighting
the significance of what the report has achieved. Finally, Chapter 7
provides recommendations for further research and improvements to
enhance the reliability and depths of insights in future studies.

# Literature Review

## AA6XXX Series Alloy

Aluminium alloys are commonly classified into two main categories: cast
aluminium alloys and wrought aluminium alloys. Notably, the latter
category holds a prominent position in the manufacturing industry,
accounting for around 80% of total production [@Reisso2004]. The two
categories of aluminium alloys demonstrate distinct attributes in terms
of their strengthening mechanisms. The enhancement of mechanical
characteristics in cast aluminium alloys is primarily achieved by the
addition of alloying elements [@Sheppard1999]. Fundamentally, the
alloying elements are distributed throughout the aluminium matrix,
modifying its atomic arrangement and enhancing the overall mechanical
strength. The process of strengthening is facilitated by various
mechanisms, including solid solution strengthening and age hardening. In
contrast, wrought Aluminium alloys employ an additional strengthening
mechanism called deformation hardening, also referred to as cold working
or strain hardening. It involves subjecting the alloy to plastic
deformation processes such as rolling, forging and extrusion. The unique
combination of strengthening mechanisms makes wrought aluminium alloys
highly desirable for a variety of applications, such as aerospace,
automotive, and structural engineering, where both strength and
formability are essential.

### The Effect of Alloying Elements

The alloys belonging to the 6XXX series are categorised as wrought
aluminium alloys, with their primary alloying elements being magnesium
$(Mg)$ and silicon $(Si)$ [@Mukhopadhyay2012]. They typically contain
about 0.35 - 1.2 wt% $Mg$ and 0.2 - 1.3 wt% $Si$ [@Reisso2004]. These
elements are added in specific proportions (1.73:1) to facilitate the
formation of magnesium silicide $Mg_2Si$, the primary hardening phase.
In the context of alloy composition, when aluminium and magnesium
silicide are present in a well-balanced proportion, they can effectively
be treated as a quasi-binary system. This approach offers significant
simplifications when representing the phase diagram, as depicted in
Figure [2.2](#fig:phase_diagram){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:phase_diagram"}.

::: center
![Al-$Mg_2Si$ phase diagram. Adapted
from [@Sheppard1999]](AlMgSi_phase.png){#fig:phase_diagram
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

Alloys produced through the direct chill (DC) casting process generally
contain an excess magnesium $Mg$ or silicon $Si$ which decreases the
solubility of $Mg_2Si$ in the alloy slightly [@Karabay2005].
Sheppard [@Sheppard1999] stated that the presence of excess $Si$ is
associated with enhanced strength characteristics while reducing
extrudability. However, Mukhopadhyay [@Mukhopadhyay2012] reported that
the presence of excess $Mg$ increases corrosion resistance but reduces
formability and strength.

To further improve the properties of the alloys, it is common practice
to introduce additional alloying elements. Among these elements,
manganese $Mn$, chromium $Cr$ and Copper $Cu$ are some of the most
frequently used [@Chakrabarti]. The addition of $Mn$ and $Cr$ serves
mainly two purposes: to prevent recrystallisation and to control
particle precipitation and transformation during various stages of
processing. Copper, however, is introduced to increase the alloy's
strength [@Marioara2007].

### Extrusion Alloys

Wrought Alloys being discussed earlier are extrusion alloys. Extrusion
is a thermomechanical manufacturing process that converts a cast billet
into a continuous length with a uniform cross-section. It involves the
application of force to push the billet through a relatively narrow die,
typically at elevated temperatures. As the billet passes through the
die, it undergoes significant plastic deformation, leading to an
alteration in its structure and properties [@Sheppard1999].
Figure [2.2](#fig:phase_diagram){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:phase_diagram"} illustrates the possible shapes that can
be formed through extrusion.

::: center
![Possible shapes that can be formed by extrusion. Adapted
from [@Sheppard1999]](extrusion_shapes.png){#fig:phase_diagram
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

Extrusion is a process widely employed in the industry as it is
versatile and cost-effective. There are two types of extrusion processes
namely: direct and indirect extrusion. In the direct extrusion process,
the die remains fixed at one extremity of the container. The application
of pressure by a hydraulic-driven ram into the billet initiates the flow
of the metal material through the opening of the die, ultimately leading
to the formation of an extruded product with the desired cross-sectional
area. In this process, the extruded metal flows in the same direction as
the motion of the ram. In contrast, the indirect extrusion process
entails the placement of the die at the end of the ram, which has been
specifically engineered to facilitate the passage of the extruded
section. The ram is moved through the container, with the opposing end
being closed. The method differs from direct extrusion in that the die
is attached to the ram, resulting in the material travelling through the
container in a direction opposed to the velocity of the ram.
Figure [2.3](#fig:extrusion_process){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:extrusion_process"} illustrates the principle of both
processes.

::: center
![Direct and Indirect Extrusion Process. Adapted
from [@Sheppard1999]](Extrusion_process.png){#fig:extrusion_process
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

The extrusion process is normally a hot working process where the billet
is heated to a specific temperature, typically around 0.5 times the
melting point $(0.5T_m)$. The extrusion temperature serves to improve
the billet's ductility and make it more susceptible to deformation under
pressure. The temperature is important as it influences the
microstructure and mechanical properties of alloys [@Yu2023]. Low
extrusion temperatures result in high tool wear and low production
efficiency while higher extrusion temperatures can reduce the strength
of the alloy. Hence, optimising the extrusion temperature for efficiency
and good mechanical properties is essential for achieving high-quality
extruded products.

## Processing of AA6XXX Alloys

The processing of aluminium and its alloys plays a very crucial effect
on its properties and typically involves the following stages:
$$Casting \rightarrow Homogenisation \rightarrow Preheating \rightarrow Extrusion \rightarrow Cooling \rightarrow Ageing$$
The microstructure and composition of aluminium alloys have a
significant role in determining their properties. However, these
properties can be enhanced through the manipulation of process
parameters at every stage in the processing route, often resulting in a
wide range of structures with identical compositions. Hence, the
relationship between composition and processing is integral in attaining
the desired structure with improved mechanical properties.

::: center
![Steps in the process of Aluminium production. Adapted
from [@Reisso2004]](extrudate_production.png){#fig:extrudate_prodcution
width="1\\columnwidth"}
:::

As indicated by the temperature evolution graph in
Figure [2.5](#fig:temp_evolution){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:temp_evolution"}, the alloys undergo multiple temperature
variations at various points along the processing route. Each of these
temperature changes has the potential to significantly impact the
microstructure of the material.

::: center
![Temperature evolution during processing. Adapted
from [@Reisso2004]](Temp_evolution.png){#fig:temp_evolution
width="1\\columnwidth"}
:::

### Direct-Chill Cast State

Within the industrial sector, the popular technique employed for the
production of ingot materials is known as direct-chill casting. This
process involves the induction of non-equilibrium freezing conditions
within the ingot. The presence of non-equilibrium freezing conditions
leads to the occurrence of compositional segregation inside the
casting [@Sheppard1999]. As stated earlier, the inclusion of alloys or
impurities can have a substantial influence on the microstructure of a
given material. When minor alloying elements are present, it is common
for intermetallic phases to undergo precipitation from the solution.
Following this, the aforementioned phases experience eutectic
solidification in the interdendritic zones, resulting in significant
alterations to the microstructure.

The high cooling rate associated with direct-chill casting prevents the
diffusion of solute within the primary, solid aluminium dendrites. As a
result, maintaining a consistent distribution of solute concentration
throughout the solid structure becomes challenging. Consequently, a
solute concentration gradient is established, extending from the outer
regions towards the central regions of the main aluminium grains present
in the solid ingot. These are known as \"cored\".

The microstructural composition of as-cast billets is distinguished by
primary dendrites consisting of a solid solution rich in aluminium,
which is intertwined with a clearly defined interdendritic network
composed of $\beta-AlFeSi$ plates
(Figure [2.6](#fig:as_Cast_AA6060){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:as_Cast_AA6060"} on page ). Birol [@Birol2004] reported
that there was hardly any evidence for the $Mg_2Si$ phase, owing to a
high enough cooling rate during solidification which retained the $Si$
remaining from the insoluble constituents and $Mg$ in solid solution.

![microstructure of AA6060 as-cast billet. Adapted
from [@Birol2004]](Alfesi_cored.png){#fig:as_Cast_AA6060
width="\\linewidth"}

![AA6060 macrostructure showing grains and segregation pattern.Adapted
from [@Birol2004]](AA6060_macrostructure.png){width="\\linewidth"}

### Homogenisation

After Casting, Segregation, a consequence of non-equilibrium
solidification is undesirable in the microstructure of alloy metals. The
microstructure of Aluminium alloys in their as-cast state is
characterised by the presence of second-phase particles distributed in a
cored interdendritic network [@Sheppard1999]. Arnoldt et
al [@Arnoldt2022] reported that homogenisation, a specific heat
treatment, reduces this interdendritic segregation and aims to dissolve
primary $Mg_2Si$ phases, consequently ensuring the uniform distribution
of both Magnesium $(Mg)$ and Silicon $(Si)$ alloys within the AA6XXX
series and also making them available for ageing at a later stage.
However, successful homogenisation requires precise temperature control,
typically below the solidus temperature. According to
Sheppard [@Sheppard1999], for AA6XXX alloys, this temperature range
falls between 550C and 560C.
Figure [2.7](#fig:homo_AA6060){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:homo_AA6060"} shows coring reduced by homogenisation
while Figure [2.8](#fig:mg2si_dist){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:mg2si_dist"} shows fine $Mg_2Si$ distribution.

![microstructure of homogenised AA6060 under light
microscope](AA6060_homo.jpg){#fig:homo_AA6060 width="\\linewidth"}

![Dark-field optical micrograph showing the distribution of $Mg_2Si$
precipitates in AA6060. Adapted
from [@Birol2004]](mg2si_dist.png){#fig:mg2si_dist width="\\linewidth"}

Typically, an industrial homogenisation process involves an initial
soaking treatment, which is then followed by controlled
cooling [@Birol2004]. During soaking, several processes occur. The
non-uniform solid solubility and diffusion rate in the Aluminium matrix
of alloying elements make the effect of homogenisation treatment
diverse [@Mukhopadhyay2012]. Alloying elements like $Mn$ and $Cr$ show
moderate solubility and very low diffusion rate, $Cu, Mg, Si, Zn$ show
appreciable solubility with high diffusion rate while $Fe$ shows
extremely low solubility with very low diffusion rate  [@Sheppard1999].

Due to the low solubility of iron $Fe$ in the aluminium matrix, a number
of non-soluble phases are also present. Among these non-soluble phases,
the plate-like $\beta-AlFeSi$ phase is the most predominant following
the casting process. This phase is known to be responsible for a number
of phase defects, negatively impacting the extrudability of the
material. However, during the homogenisation process, there is a
transformation of this phase from $\beta-AlFeSi$ into smaller-sized
spheroidal $\alpha-Al(FeMn)Si$ particles as illustrated in
Figure [2.9](#fig:phase_transform){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:phase_transform"}. The $\alpha\rightarrow\beta$
transformation results in the removal of $Si$ from the matrix leading to
decreased brittleness in the $\alpha-Fe$ phase and an increased
availability of $Mg_2Si$ for subsequent precipitation. The kinetics of
this transformation is increased by the introduction of
$Mn$ [@Magnus2019], hence the reason for $Mn$ addition in alloys with
low $Mn$ content. In the process, the $Mg_2Si$ particles and large
eutectics are likewise dissolved, while the coring from the as-cast
microstructure is eliminated in favour of achieving a more uniformly
distributed content of the solute elements $Mg$ and $Si$ [@Birol2004].

::: center
![Schematic illustration of $\beta$-phase transformation during
homogenisation. Adapted
from [@Bayat2019]](phase_transform.png){#fig:phase_transform
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

### Cooling Rates

The cooling of billets after homogenisation is just as important as
homogenisation itself. This is because the cooling rate impacts the
extrudability of the billets [@BIROL2013]. Generally, two categories of
cooling rates can be employed: fast cooling and slow cooling. According
to Sheppard [@Sheppard1999], it was observed that when the
homogenisation process is followed by rapid cooling rates, a significant
amount of magnesium $(Mg)$ and silicon $(Si)$ remains in a dissolved
condition, resulting in the formation of small precipitates that are
uniformly distributed. This particular attribute enables the
disintegration of these solid particles when subjected to subsequent
heating. Nevertheless, it is important to note that the inclusion of
magnesium (Mg) and silicon (Si) in a solid solution has an adverse
effect on the flow stress of the alloy, rendering it more resistant to
deformation and thus reducing its extrudability Birol [@Birol2004].

Equally, slow cooling rates after the process of homogenisation
facilitate the formation and growth of $Mg_2Si$ precipitates within the
crystalline arrangement of the grains, along the interfaces between
grains, and on the surfaces of particles rich in iron [@Sheppard1999].
As a consequence, the formation of larger, coarse $\beta-Mg_2Si$
particles occurs. These coarse $Mg_2Si$ particles require a longer time
to dissolve at elevated temperatures during the preheating process. In
addition, these factors have the potential to induce initial melting and
surface tearing in the extrusion process, leading to poor surface
qualities [@BIROL2013]. In their study, Karabay et al. [@Karabay2005]
observed that under extremely low cooling rates, the formation of large
$Mg_2Si$ particles results in a distribution pattern that is primarily
centred along grain boundaries, as illustrated in
Figure [2.10](#fig:mg2_si grain_bound){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:mg2_si grain_bound"}. This particular distribution has
been found to have a detrimental effect on the mechanical properties of
the alloy.

::: center
![Optical micrograph of billet microstructure (Mg2Si precipitation along
the grain boundaries). Adapted
from [@Karabay2005]](Mg2si_grain1.png){#fig:mg2_si grain_bound
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

According to Birol [@Birol2004], there is a suggested optimal cooling
rate that lies between fast and slow cooling. This optimal rate
facilitates the effective depletion of the solid solution matrix,
leading to a decrease in flow stress and a reduction of the resistance
to deformation during the extrusion process. Birol [@Birol2004] reports
that the optimum cooling rate lies between 200C/h and 100C/h.

### Pre-Extrusion Processsing

Following the homogenisation process, the billet must undergo a
pre-heating phase to reach the desired extrusion temperature. However,
it's important to note that this preheating step may induce further
microstructural changes. Sheppard's research [@Sheppard1999] emphasizes
the crucial role of process heat in the extrusion of 6XXX alloys. The
success of the extrusion process relies on two key factors: billet
preheating and temperature increase during deformation. These elements
are essential for effectively dissolving the magnesium silicide present
in the alloy, and allowing for mechanical properties to be attained
through artificial ageing.

To achieve this, the metal must be heated to a temperature sufficiently
above the solvus temperature, typically within the range of 440C - 490C
and maintained at that temperature just before the extrusion. In
practice, the duration of this preheating stage typically spans between
5 to 45 minutes illustrated in
Figure [2.4](#fig:extrudate_prodcution){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:extrudate_prodcution"} on page . The objective is to
promote the rapid dissolution of magnesium silicide within an extremely
short timeframe during deformation. Failure to meet this critical
condition may lead to the persistence of undissolved $Mg_2Si$ particles,
as depicted in the accompanying
Figure [2.11](#fig:undissolved_mg2si){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:undissolved_mg2si"}, consequently resulting in an
inadequate ageing response.

::: center
![Undissolved $Mg_2Si$ in a AA6082 extrusion. Adapted
from [@Sheppard1999]](undissolved_mg2si.png){#fig:undissolved_mg2si
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

Notably, research has revealed that higher preheating temperatures can
lead to improvements in both extrudability and post-ageing strength.
These improvements are attributed to the enhanced dissolution of
$Mg_2Si$ particles, which occurs both before and during
extrusion [@Birol2004]. In an interesting development reported by
Reiso [@Reisso2004], further improvements were observed by overheating
the billets before cooling them to the desired extrusion temperature.
This overheating strategy was found to increase the likelihood of
dissolving coarse Mg2Si particles, yielding enhanced material
properties.

### Factors Affecting Extrudability

The extrusion pressure serves as a widely used metric in assessing the
extrudability of a material. It is directly linked to the flow stress of
the material, which, in turn, determines the material's resistance to
deformation. The presence of alloying elements in solid solution is a
significant contributing factor to work hardening in
materials [@Mukhopadhyay2012]. These elements contribute to an increase
in work hardening, thereby increasing the flow stress and consequently,
the extrusion pressure. Notably, the impact of various elements on flow
stress varies, depending on factors such as size misfit within the
aluminium matrix. For instance, at high concentrations, the presence of
magnesium $(Mg)$ and manganese $(Mn)$ can negatively impact the
extrusion pressure. Hence, there is a strong interest in minimising the
amount of solute in solid solution before and during the extrusion
process. This can be done by either increasing the alloy content or by
increasing the cooling rate after homogenisation [@Sheppard1999].

Another parameter for evaluating extrudability is the extrusion speed,
which is simply the speed at which the material can be extruded without
displaying significant surface defects. As stated earlier, the
fundamental cause of surface defects is generally attributed to the
presence of coarse $Mg_2Si$ particles which are formed at low cooling
rates from homogenisation temperature. These large $Mg_2Si$ particles
are difficult to solutionize as they need more time to dissolve at
common preheating temperatures hence leading to melting and surface
tearing during extrusion [@Birol2004]. However, according to
Reisso [@Nie2004], by increasing the cooling rates after homogenisation,
the sizes of the $Mg_2Si$ particles are reduced, they are easy to
solutionize and hence increase the extrudability by increasing the
maximum extrusion speed.
Figure [2.12](#fig: ex_pre_speed){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: ex_pre_speed"} shows the effect of cooling rate on
maximum extrusion speed and extrusion pressure.

::: center
![Effect of cooling rates on maximum pressure and speed. Adapted
from [@Sheppard1999]](ex_pre_speed.png){#fig: ex_pre_speed
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

### Ageing

The 6XXX alloys are heat-treatable. As a result, the elevated
temperature treatment on these alloys is strategically employed to
regulate their properties through age-hardenable
precipitates [@Mukhopadhyay2012]. The age-hardenable precipitation
sequence of AA6XXX alloys without additional alloying elements is known
to be:
$$SSS \rightarrow clusters \rightarrow GP zones \rightarrow \beta'' \rightarrow hexagonal \ \beta' (Mg_2Si) \rightarrow fcc \ \beta (Mg_2Si)$$

Strengthening in the alloy occurs through the formation of coherent GP
zones, as well as coherent $\beta(Mg_2Si)$ precipitates, during the
ageing treatment. This strengthening is attributed to the existence of
strain fields surrounding the precipitates [@Mukhopadhyay2012]. If there
is a decrease in strength after ageing, this is often because of the
reduction in super-saturation of $Mg$ and $Si$. This reduction leads to
a lower concentration of alloying elements available for the formation
of hardening phases like $\beta''$. As previously discussed, the
supersaturation of $Mg$ and $Si$ at the onset of ageing can be
influenced at all stages in the processing route.

# Experimental Procedure

## Gleeble Tests

The data utilised in this research was acquired from a Gleeble testing
experiment done on September 15, 2020. This experiment was carried out
as a collaborative endeavour comprising Jostein Røyset, Oddvin Reiso
from Hydro, Knut Marthinsen from NTNU, and Sarah George from NTNU/UCT.

### Test Samples

Three Alloys, namely AA6061, AA6082 and AA6060 with compositions
detailed in Table [3.1](#tab:alloy-composition){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:alloy-composition"}, were cut out of billets. The alloys
were subsequently cooled to room temperature at varying rates. The full
range of cooling rates for each alloy are as follows:

-   **CF:** Fast (9.4 °C/min)

-   **CN:** Normal ($\frac{1}{2}$ x Fast = 4.7°C/min)

-   **CS:** Slow ($\frac{1}{4}$ x Fast = 2.35°C/min)

-   **NOC:** No cooling (rapid quench from the 575°C homogenisation
    temperature)

::: {#tab:alloy-composition}
  **Alloy**    **Si**   **Mg**   **Fe**   **Mn**   **Cr**   **Cu**  
  ----------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
  AA6061        0.62     0.80     0.21     0.05     0.08     0.21   
  AA6082        1.00     0.66     0.20     0.54      \-       \-    
  AA6060        0.45     0.37     0.20     0.05      \-       \-    

  : Alloy composition
:::

### Testing Conditions

Testing was conducted on cylindrical specimens with dimensions of 8 mm
in diameter and 12 mm in length. Both the upper and lower surfaces
underwent a grinding process in order to attain a polished and refined
texture. Three individual experiments were conducted for each set of
conditions, with the parameters shown in
Table [3.2](#tab:experimental-parameters){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:experimental-parameters"}:

::: {#tab:experimental-parameters}
  **Parameter**                 **Value**
  ----------------------------- -----------------------
  Strain Rate                   2.5 s^-1^
  Strain (True)                 1.2
  Starting Height               12 mm
  Final Height                  3.5 mm
  Temperature                   440 °C (under solvus)
  Heating Rate                  3.33 °C per second
  Holding Time at Temperature   30 seconds

  : Experimental Parameters
:::

The graph presented below illustrates the testing procedure for
experiments conducted.

::: center
![Temperature-Time plot showing Gleeble test plan. Adapted
from [@Karabay2005]](temp_time_plot.png){#fig:temp_time
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

### Data Analysis

The gleeble data collected was analysed using Python. The analysis
involved data manipulation with Pandas and data visualisation with
Matplotlib, Seaborn, and Bokeh. These tools facilitated the extraction
of valuable insights from the dataset, enhancing result interpretation.

## Image Analysis

### Sample Preparation

The steps taken to prepare the sample for microstructural analysis are
shown in figure [3.2](#fig:temp_time){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:temp_time"} below.

::: center
![Sample Preparation steps taken for microstructural analysis. Adapted
MEC2046F notes.](sample_prep.png){#fig:temp_time
width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

### Image Processing

The analysis of the images was conducted using ImageJ software. For each
image, manual thresholding was performed, followed by particle analysis
to determine both the area fraction of particles and the individual area
of each particle. The particle sizes were then used to establish the
particle size distribution, with inclusion criteria set for particles
exhibiting a circularity within the range of 0.5 to 1.00. Subsequently,
the particle diameters were calculated using the formula:
$\frac{\pi d^2}{4}$.

# Results

### Particle Size Distribution And Area Fraction

The particle size distributions for the alloys AA6060, AA6061, and
AA6082 are depicted in
Figures [\[fig: AA6060_pd\]](#fig: AA6060_pd){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6060_pd"},
[\[fig: AA6061_pd\]](#fig: AA6061_pd){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6061_pd"}, and
[\[fig: AA6082_pd\]](#fig: AA6082_pd){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6082_pd"}. Upon analysing these distributions, some
significant patterns become apparent.

In the case of alloy AA6061, it becomes apparent that an increase in
cooling rates leads to a shift in particle distribution towards larger
particles. In contrast, slower rates of cooling in the case of AA6082
lead to a transition towards the formation of bigger particles.
Additionally, AA6060 alloy demonstrates a prevailing range of equal
circle diameter (ECD) between 20-50 nm while its slower rates of cooling
are associated with an increase in particle size.

In a broader context, it is noteworthy that higher heating rates
consistently result in a greater percentage of particles that fall
within the 20-50 nm ECD range across all three alloys.

In the case of alloy AA6060, the condition known as \"Slow Cool\"
maintains a relatively uniform particle size distribution, characterised
by an average equal circular diameter (ECD) of 118 nm. The transition to
the \"Homogenised\" condition results in a minor increase in the average
ECD to 125.11 nm, accompanied by a decrease in the standard deviation to
109.37 nm. Both conditions suggest a minimal presence of particles
within the alloy.

![](6060_w_pd.png){#fig:AA6061_pd_w width="\\linewidth"}

![](6060_h_pd.png){#fig:AA6060_pd_h width="\\linewidth"}

![](6060_s_pd.png){#fig:AA6060_pd_cs width="1\\linewidth"}

The alloy AA6061, when subjected to the \"Slow Cool\" condition,
demonstrates a relatively small mean particle size of 77.37 nm, which is
tightly dispersed. Additionally, it exhibits a low standard deviation of
45 nm. The area fraction is likewise rather low, suggesting a small
presence of particles. In contrast, the \"Normal Cool\" condition leads
to a notable increase in particle size, namely to an average diameter of
78.25 nm, accompanied by a greater standard deviation of 114 nm.
Consequently, this condition exhibits a significant rise in the area
percentage. In the \"Fast Cool,\" condition, the average particle size
further increases to 114.6 nm. This increase is accompanied by a notable
increase in the standard deviation and a more substantial area fraction.
This condition yields larger and more variable particle sizes.

![](6061_f_pd.png){#fig:AA6061_pd_cf width="\\linewidth"}

![](6061_n_pd.png){#fig:AA6061_pd_cn width="\\linewidth"}

![](6061_s_pd.png){#fig:AA6061_pd_cs width="1\\linewidth"}

In the case of alloy AA6082, the \"Slow Cool\" condition presents a
substantial mean particle size of 117.41 nm, a relatively high standard
deviation of 187 nm, and a significant area fraction, which suggests a
notable presence of particles. The condition known as \"Normal Cool\"
leads to a decrease in the average particle size to 103.12 nm, but the
standard deviation remains very large at 180 nm. In the \"Fast Cool\"
condition, the data reveals a lower average particle size of 96.66 nm,
as well as a comparatively low standard deviation of 108 nm.
Additionally, there is a decrease in the proportion of the total area
occupied by the particles.

![](6082_f_pd.png){#fig:AA6082_pd_cf width="\\linewidth"}

![](6082_n_pd.png){#fig:AA6082_pd_cn width="\\linewidth"}

![](6082_s_pd.png){#fig:AA6082_pd_cs width="\\linewidth"}

::: center
![Area Fraction of as a function of Heating rate
](area-fraction.png){#fig:area_fraction width="0.8\\columnwidth"}
:::

::: {#tab:results-image}
  ----------- --------------- ------------------- ------------------- --------------------- ------------------ --
  **Alloy**    **Condition**   **Mean Particle**   **St. dev. (nm)**   **% Area Fraction**   **St. dev. (%)**  
                                 **Size (nm)**                                                                 
  6060           Slow Cool          117.980             113.710               0.005               0.001        
                Homogenised         125.110             109.370               0.003               0.002        
               Water Quench         100.670             89.970                0.002               0.001        
  6061           Slow Cool          77.370                45                  0.001               0.002        
                Normal Cool         78.250                114                 0.009               0.040        
                 Fast Cool          114.600               349                 0.004               0.316        
  6082           Slow Cool          117.410               187                 0.010               0.103        
                Normal Cool         103.120               180                 0.009               0.123        
                 Fast Cool          96.660                108                 0.004               0.056        
  ----------- --------------- ------------------- ------------------- --------------------- ------------------ --

  : Summary of important results from image processing
:::

### Gleeble Tests

### AA6060 {#aa6060 .unnumbered}

The experimental results of testing conducted on the AA6060 alloy are
visually represented in
Figure [\[fig: AA6060_plot\]](#fig: AA6060_plot){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6060_plot"} where samples exposed to various cooling
rates known as \"slow cool\" (in green), \"homogenised\" (in blue), and
\"water-quench\" (in red). Here, the \"slow cool\" condition is used as
a baseline against which comparisons are made with the other two
conditions. For a closer examination of the data, refer to
Figure [4.12](#fig: AA6060_zoom){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6060_zoom"} which provides a magnified view of the
section at a strain of 0.5.

![AA6060 Stress Vs Strain Curves](AA6060_flow.png){#fig: AA6060_flow
width="\\linewidth"}

![AA6060 Zoom at Strain = 0.5](AA6060_zoom.png){#fig: AA6060_zoom
width="\\linewidth"}

The results indicate that there is a clear difference in the flow stress
that can be identified between the slow cool and water quench
conditions. This can be seen
in [4.12](#fig: AA6060_zoom){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6060_zoom"} with an overall approximate difference of
6MPa between both conditions. This difference is repeatable and
consistent, as illustrated by the 3 test results in each case. The
homogenised sample, however, shows similar flow stress to the
water-quench samples but exhibits less repeatability and reliability as
only one test was conducted for that condition.

### AA6061 {#aa6061 .unnumbered}

For AA6061, the \"Slow cool\" condition was also chosen as a reference
point. In the \"Slow cool\" condition, the alloy exhibits an average
flow stress of 60.35 MPa with a minimal variation between both tests
conducted. Unlike the AA6060 alloy, the effect of the cooling rates on
the overall flow stress appears to be less significant.
Figure [4.14](#fig: AA6061_zoom){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6061_zoom"} showing a highlighted section at 0.5
strain shows approximately 1.5 MPa difference between the \"Slow Cool\"
and \"Normal Cool\" condition, while the difference between the \"Slow
Cool\" and \"Fast cool\" is even less at 0.85 MPa. Although the
difference is not as pronounced as in the case of the AA6060 alloy, it
still suggests a discernable variation in resistance.

![AA6061 Stress Vs Strain Curves](AA6061_flow.png){#fig:AA6061_flow
width="\\linewidth"}

![AA6061 Zoom at Strain = 0.5](AA6061_zoom.png){#fig: AA6061_zoom
width="\\linewidth"}

### AA6082 {#aa6082 .unnumbered}

For the AA6082 alloy, a comprehensive series of tests was performed for
every condition. However, it is important to recognise the existence of
certain anomalies within the dataset. In order to ensure the reliability
of the data, the values in the \"Average 2\" column were computed by
excluding these outliers.
Figure [4.16](#fig: AA6082_zoom){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig: AA6082_zoom"} demonstrates a significant difference of
roughly 3 MPa between the \"Slow Cool\" and \"Fast Cool\" conditions,
with the former serving as the reference point. Additionally, there is a
1.3 MPa difference between the \"Slow Cool\" and \"Fast Cool\"
conditions. It's worth emphasizing that this difference is consistently
observed across the tests, indicating a reliable trend.

![AA6082 Stress Vs Strain Curves](AA6082_flow.png){#fig: AA6082_flow
width="\\linewidth"}

![A6082 Zoom at Strain = 0.5](AA6082_zoom.png){#fig: AA6082_zoom
width="\\linewidth"}

### Summary {#summary .unnumbered}

Table [4.2](#tab:test-results){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:test-results"} shows a summary of the test results
obtained from the gleeble data while
Figure [4.17](#fig:avg_stress){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:avg_stress"} shows a visual representation. The \"Average
1\" column calculates the average flow stress at 0.5 strain for each
test conducted on the samples, while the \"Average 2\" column provides
the average value after excluding the outliers from the dataset.

::: center
![Plot of Average Flow Stress for each alloy at 0.5
Strain](average_stress_plot.png){#fig:avg_stress
width="0.7\\columnwidth"}
:::

::: {#tab:test-results}
  ----------- --------------- ------------ ------------ ------------ --------------- ---------------
  **Alloy**    **Condition**   **Test 1**   **Test 2**   **Test 3**   **Average 1**   **Average 2**
                                 (MPa)        (MPa)        (MPa)          (MPa)           (MPa)
  AA6060            CS           57.44          \-           \-           57.44           57.44
                Homogenised      52.16        53.198       53.366         52.91           52.91
                    WQ           57.65         59.4        59.03          58.69           58.69
  AA6061            CS            60.6         60.1          \-           60.35           60.35
                    CN            61.9         61.9          \-           61.90           61.90
                    CF            61.3         61.1          \-           61.20           61.20
  AA6082            CS            54.3         65.1         55.7          58.37           55.00
                    CN            55.8         56.3         56.9          56.33           56.33
                    CF            56.3         58.1         58.1          57.5            58.10
  ----------- --------------- ------------ ------------ ------------ --------------- ---------------

  : Test Results for Different Alloys and Conditions showing flow Stress
  at 0.5 Strain
:::

# Discussion

Upon conducting these experiments, it was expected to find that flow
stress would be affected by cooling rate in a manner similar to what was
observed for AA6061 and AA6082 alloys in
Table [4.2](#tab:test-results){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:test-results"} where the flow stress was lower for lower
cooling rates. Similarly, it was expected to find a behaviour identical
to what is seen for AA6060 and AA6082 alloys in
Table [4.1](#tab:results-image){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:results-image"} in terms of the cooling rate and particle
size/distribution relationship where the particle size was larger for
lower cooling rates.

This expectation was based on prior
studies [@Sheppard1999; @Karabay2005; @Birol2004; @Nie2004] where the
authors demonstrated a decrease in cooling rate leads to increased
extrudability (corresponding to a decrease in flow stress). This
relationship shows that the faster the metal is cooled during
homogenisation, the more likely it is to resist deformation since it is
directly linked to flow stress. Similarly, the studies show an increase
in $Mg_2Si$ particle size with decreasing cooling rates. This also
suggests that the slower the metal is cooled during homogenisation, the
more likely it is for the $Mg_2Si$ particles to grow bigger. This is
because there is enough time for the $Mg$ and $Si$ particles to diffuse
from the solid solution and form $Mg_2Si$ particles as $Mg$ and $Si$
have high diffusion rates [@Sheppard1999].

In the case of AA6060 alloy, there is a $\approx 11\%$ difference in
flow stress between the \"Water Quench\" and \"Homogenised\" conditions,
while there was no significant difference between the \"Homogenised\"
and \"Slow Cool\" conditions. This suggests that there might exist a
critical range of cooling rates between \"Slow Cool\" and \"Water
Quench\" where the flow stress of the alloy reduces significantly. While
examining the mean particle size, it was observed that although the
particle size increases generally when using the \"Water Quench\"
condition reference, the increase between the \"Water Quench\" and
\"Slow Cool\" conditions is less pronounced. An important factor to
consider is the composition of the AA6060 alloy, as shown in
Table [3.1](#tab:alloy-composition){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:alloy-composition"} on . It shows that the AA6060 alloy
has the lowest amount of $Mg$ and $Si$ in its composition. Since the
diffusion rates of $Mg$ and $Si$ is high, a possible explanation for
this variation in particle size is that cooling rates between \"Water
Quench\" and \"Homogenised\" provide the $Mg$ and $Si$ particles enough
time to diffuse from solid solution completely, forming $Mg_2Si$ until
there's no more $Mg$ and $Si$. Therefore, with slower cooling rates, no
more $Mg_2Si$ will form after a certain time.

Interestingly, the AA6061 alloy was found to exhibit a different
behaviour in terms of mean particle size. In contrast to the AA6082 and
AA6060 alloys, there is a $\approx 48\%$ decrease between the \"Fast
Cool\" and \"Slow Cool\" conditions and barely any difference between
the \"Normal Cool\" and \"Slow Cool\" conditions of this alloy. To
provide an explanation for this large percentage decrease, it might be
helpful to take a look at the composition of the AA6061 alloy
in [3.1](#tab:alloy-composition){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:alloy-composition"} on page . It can be seen that while
the AA6060 and AA6082 have no chromium $Cr$ and copper $Cu$, the AA6061
alloy does have them, albeit in small fractions. According
to [@Magnus2019],the addition of $Cr$ as an alloying element serves to
prevent recrystallisation and to control particle precipitation.
Furthermore, since $Cr$ has a low diffusion rate, it is suggested that
the diffusion time will be longer, and consequently, nucleation of
particles is more difficult with fast cooling rates resulting in smaller
mean particle size.

Among the examined alloys, It can be seen that only the AA6082 alloy,
conformed closely to the anticipated behaviour in both cases in how the
cooling rates affect the particle sizes and hence the flow stress of the
material. For AA6082, there was a 21% increase in particle size between
the \"Fast Cool\" and \"Slow Cool\" conditions while there was a 7%
difference between the \"Normal Cool\" and \"Fast Cool\" conditions. The
explanation for this behaviour can be attributed to the relatively high
$Mn$ content in the AA6082 alloy. It is suggested that due to the high
$Mn$ content in the AA6082 alloy as shown in
Table [3.1](#tab:alloy-composition){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:alloy-composition"}. This higher $Mn$ content results in
shorter diffusion distances, hence requiring less time for diffusion and
consequently making nucleation easier. According to [@Sheppard1999],
$Mn$ dispersoids act as heterogeneous nucleation sites, increasing the
chance for precipitation of $\beta-Mg_2Si$ particles. Furthermore, there
is evidence of a fairly consistent increase in the flow stress with
increasing cooling rates. This agrees with Birol [@Birol2004] that
reported that rapid cooling rates, trap $Mg$ and $Si$ in solid solution,
in which both elements have an adverse effect on the flow stress of the
alloy and thus increase its resistance to deformation.

Upon comparing the three alloys under study, it becomes apparent that
the response to different cooling rates is specific to each alloy. The
alloy AA6060 exhibited a distinctive behaviour, characterised by a
notable disparity in flow stress between the \"Water Quench\" and
\"Homogenised\" states. In contrast, the alloys AA6061 and AA6082 did
not display a noticeable alteration in flow stress when subjected to
comparable conditions. This implies that the alloy's composition, namely
the inclusion of elements such as chromium ($Cr$) and copper ($Cu$),
significantly influences the impact of cooling rates on flow stress and
particle size. The behaviour of AA6082 aligns closely with the findings
reported in previous studies. It demonstrates a constant pattern of
increasing flow stress with faster cooling rates. This can be attributed
to the retention of magnesium ($Mg$) and silicon ($Si$) within the solid
solution, leading to increased resistance to deformation. The
distinctive behaviour of AA6061 can be attributed to the impact of
chromium ($Cr$) on the process of particle precipitation.

# Conclusions

On the basis of this finding, the following may be concluded:

-   The comparison of three distinct AA6XXX alloys, namely AA6060,
    AA6061, and AA6082 revealed that the effect of cooling rate from
    homogenisation temperature during high compression testing is not
    uniform across all alloys AA6XXX alloys.

-   A decrease in cooling rate from homogenisation temperature for
    AA6082 and AA6061, results in a decrease in flow stress; a measure
    of deformation resistance.

-   AA6082 consistently exhibited an increase in flow stress and a
    decrease in mean particle size with faster cooling rates, attributed
    to the effective trapping of the solutes in solid solution,
    enhancing deformation resistance.

-   AA6060 exhibited a cooling rate range below the \"Slow Cool\"
    condition and above the \"Water Quench\" condition with slow cooling
    rates that lead to a decrease in flow stress and consequently a
    reduction in deformation resistance. The particle size increased
    with slow cooling rates

-   AA6061 deviated by increasing mean particle size with faster cooling
    rates, influenced by the effect of Chromium on nucleation and
    particle growth.

# Future Work

-   Conductivity Testing could be done to quantify solid solution atoms
    since more solute in solution results in less conductivity

-   Post-deformation microstructural analysis could be performed to
    examine dislocation and precipitate interactions.

-   More Analysis of SEM and TEM Images for improved quantitative
    information on precipitates.

-   Expand the scope of gleeble testing to include more alloys, ensuring
    reliable results, especially since some compression data were
    missing.

-   The feasibility of using uniaxial compression testing to identify
    the variations in the deformation resistance of material with
    varying cooling rates after homogenisation could be explored.

# Management Portfolio

### Work Breakdown Structure

I have managed this project using core engineering principles. Firstly,
I set my objectives for the project using the SMART rule. I ensured the
objectives were Specific - by getting into details. Measurable -By using
quantitative language. Acceptable - by making sure there's an agreement
between myself and the stakeholders(My supervisor). I also made sure the
objectives were realistic - meaning the objectives I set had a time
frame as seen in the gantt chart. I ensured that I kept the deadlines in
mind and kept track of my progress

### Gantt Chart

### Agendas

### Minutes

# Reflection

Throughout the duration of this project, my goals and objectives kept
changing. As a result, it was not a linear, start-to-finish process as I
have typically experienced while doing other courses. The project's
scope constantly evolved over time which led me to make the decision to
eliminate a significant section that initially focussed on validating
the feasibility of using compression testing to model extrusion. This
experience made me critically aware and improved my adaptability. Having
to put the work on the project to a halt to concentrate on other
courses, while also responsibly informing my supervisor, taught me
valuable lessons about professionalism. Using tools like Gantt chart and
work breakdown structure, taking minutes and writing agendas
significantly enhanced my project management skills. These tools did not
only make me organised but also improved my ability to actively engage
during meetings, in contrast to my previous habit of merely listening.

As I move forward I plan to carry these skills with me and hone them.
